Update docs and server binding addr per OPA v1.0 specs (#7140)
open-policy-agent/opa: docs/content/v0-upgrade.md

---
title: Upgrading to v1.0
kind: documentation
weight: 122
---

All users should plan to upgrade to OPA v1.0 eventually. Some users, with more
control over the Rego loaded into the OPA instances they run will be able to do
so more quickly. Other users with less control or running third party Rego may

> wish to upgrade to OPA v1.0 and use the v0 compatibility functionality to

Author: Yes. Updated.

upgrade gradually.

This documentation covers the different upgrade scenarios and the best course of
action for each. The documentation makes use of the following concepts:

- **Bundle Producer**: A system based on `opa build` that produces a bundle that
  is loaded by consumers.

> - **Bundle Consumer**: An OPA instance running that loads and evaluates policy

Author: Updated

  from a bundle in the system.
- **Authoring**: The process of writing Rego policies before bundles are
  produced and consumed. In managed systems, this might be a user's only contact
  point with OPA.

In some systems, where OPA is used without a bundle, there is no producer. This
simplifies the upgrade process.

## General Upgrade Approach: Upgrade Producers, then Consumers

Users will need to upgrade to OPA v1.0 in their own way, depending on their
release and change management processes, use cases and risk tolerance. The

> general advice is to upgrade producers first, then consumers. Some users may

Reviewer: We should add that the reason for why we recommend upgrading producers first is because they'll set a rego-version flag in compiled bundles, which means that consumers can be run without `--v0-compatible` flags (launch command can be kept agnostic). Also, it's more likely that you have several consumers but just a few producers (singular, even).

Author: Updated

wish to migrate to OPA v1.0 all at once, with adequate testing and validation
this is possible. Not all steps are necessary for all users so a hybrid approach
is also an option depending on your context.

The rest of this documentation is designed to meet users where they find
themselves and direct them down the smoothest path to upgrade to OPA
v1.0.

## Detailed Producer & Consumer Version Scenarios

Tabulated in this section are the different versions of OPA users might be
working with in different parts of their systems. Select the scenario that best
matches your setup to find the recommended upgrade path.

If you are in doubt, [Scenario 1](#scenario-1) is the most common starting
point and we recommended you start there.

> | OPA Versions  | Consumer v0.x                        | Consumer Versions Mixed   | Consumer v1.0                        |

Author: That's possible. Updated the cell names.

| ------------- | ------------------------------------ | ------------------------- | ------------------------------------ |
| Producer v0.x | [Scenario 1](#scenario-1) (All v0.x) | [Scenario 4](#scenario-4) | [Scenario 7](#scenario-7)            |
| Producer mix  | [Scenario 2](#scenario-2)            | [Scenario 5](#scenario-5) | [Scenario 8](#scenario-8)            |
| Producer v1.0 | [Scenario 3](#scenario-3)            | [Scenario 6](#scenario-6) | [Scenario 9](#scenario-9) (All v1.0) |

<!-- source https://docs.google.com/drawings/d/137EObOVhMIVk9NEWOX0u_1eQOqe0MRkPQlmwKXkYWEU/edit -->

{{< figure src="opa-v0-upgrade.png" width="65" caption="Upgrade flows to OPA v1.0" >}}

## Upgrade Scenarios

Listed below are the different upgrade scenarios and the recommended migration
plans for each case.

> ### Scenario 1

Author: Good idea. Updated

All OPA runtimes - both bundle consumers and producers - are v0.x. This is the
most common starting point for users upgrading from a v0.x version of OPA.

#### How to Run

- Policies are authored to be v0.x compatible.

#### Next

Start upgrading producers to v1.0 ([Scenario 2](#scenario-2)) until all producers

> are v1.0 ([Scenario 3](#scenario-3)).

Author: Seems obvious but we can change if folks don't realize.

> are v1.0 ([Scenario 3](#scenario-3)).

Reviewer: nah, probably not needed ..

### Scenario 2

Some bundle producers are v1.0, while some remain on v0.x. All bundle consumers
are v0.x. This might be the case if you have bundles from different tenants or
users using different OPA versions and you cannot control the versions they use.

#### Pre-requisites

> Users cannot proceed with until they have either a single version of bundle

Author: Updated

producers or have a means to control the use of `--v0-compatible` on newer
producers.

#### How to Run

- Policies are authored to be v0.x compatible.
- v0.x producers are run as-is.
- v0.x consumers are run as-is.

#### Next

Continue migrating producers to v1.0 until all producers have been upgraded
([Scenario 3](#scenario-3)).

### Scenario 3

OPA bundles are produced by OPA v1.0 instances, consumers are still on v0.x. This
scenario is common as users upgrade to OPA v1.0 by upgrading their producers
first.

#### Pre-requisites

Control of producers to set `--v0-compatible` or use `rego.v0` imports is
required.

#### How to Run

- Policies are authored to be v0.x compatible.
- v0.x consumers are run as-is.
- v1.0 producer is run with `--v0-compatible`, or modules have `rego.v0` import.
- Since policies will always be consumed by a v0.x OPA, all policies _must_ be v0.x compliant.

#### Next

Now that all producers are v1.0, and consumers are still not all v1.0, it's time
to get all the consumers to v1.0, ([Scenario 6](#scenario-6)).

### Scenario 4

> Producers are v0, consumers are a mix of v0 and v1.0. This scenario might occur

Author: I've done an editing pass to have `v0.x` and `v1.0`.

when users have partially upgraded OPA instances to v1.0, but have not yet
upgraded their consumers. This is not a recommended step if it can be avoided as
it's recommended to upgrade producers first.

#### Pre-requisites

OPA v1.0 consumers must be able to run with `--v0-compatible` to accept v0
bundles. This upgrade path cannot continue until this is possible.

#### How to Run

- Policies are authored to be v0.x compatible.

> - v0.x producers and v0.x consumers are run as is.

Author: We have 👇 
```
#### Pre-requisites

OPA v1.0 consumers must be able to run with `--v0-compatible` to accept v0.x
bundles. This upgrade path cannot continue until this is possible.
```

### Next

> Downgrade consumers to v0.x ([Scenario 1](#scenario-1)) until all consumers are

Author: Agreed downgrade does not seem the right approach. Updated the next steps section.

v0. It's also possible to upgrade producers to v1.0 and continue the upgrade
from that point. Generally, it's recommended to upgrade producers first, however
depending on your existing OPAs v1.0 consumers deployments, you may prefer to
upgrade all your producers to v1.0 rather than to downgrade consumers.

### Scenario 5

Mixed versions of OPA are being used for both bundle production and consumption.

#### Pre-requisites

As users have a mix of bundle producers, they must have control over the runtime
options for the producers to set `--v0-compatible`. Users must also have control
over their v1 consumers to set the `--v0-compatible` flag. Both these conditions
must be met for the upgrade to proceed.

#### How to Run

- Policies are authored to be v0.x compatible.

> - v1.0 consumers are run with `--v0-compatible`.

Author: Updated

### Next

> Please gradually upgrade producers to v1.0 ([Scenario 8](#scenario-8)) until all

Author: Yes, updated.

> producers are v1.0 ([Scenario 9](#scenario-9)).

Author: Only  scenario 6 seems like the next logical step.

### Scenario 6

All consumers can be run without flags, as the bundle will contain
attributes to inform v1.0 OPAs to accept v0.x modules.

#### How to Run

- Policies are authored to be v0.x compatible.
- v0.x consumers are run as-is. Bundles will contain v0.x policies

> - v1.0 consumers are run as-is. Bundles will contain rego version attribute, so v0.x modules are accepted.

Author: The next line. Does this work?

```
#### Pre-requisites

If users cannot set their OPA v1 producers to use `--v0-compatible` to be
compatible with their v0.x consumers, then this upgrade path is blocked.
```

compatible with their v0.x consumers, then this upgrade path is blocked.

#### Next

Running exclusively v1.0 producers and consumers, ([Scenario 9](#scenario-9)), is
the next and final step.

### Scenario 7

All consumers are v1.0, but producers are v0.x. This scenario might occur when
OPAs used for evaluation are upgraded before the policy bundling system.

#### Pre-requisites

If v1.0 consumers cannot be run with `--v0-compatible`, when loading v0 consumer
generated bundle, the bundles cannot include Rego version attribute. This means
the upgrade path is blocked until either the consumers can create bundles with a
Rego version or the `--v0-compatible` flag is available for producers.

#### How to Run

- Policies are authored to be v0.x compatible.
- v1.0 consumers are run with `--v0-compatible`

#### Next

Upgrade producers to v1.0 ([Scenario 8](#scenario-8)) until all producers are v1.0
([Scenario 9](#scenario-9)).

### Scenario 8

All consumers are v1.0, but producers are a mix of v0.x and v1.0.

#### How to Run

- Policies are authored to be v0.x compatible.
- v1.0 consumers are run with `--v0-compatible`
- v1.0 producers are run with `--v0-compatible`

> - `rego.v0` imports cannot be used; rejected by v0.x bundle producers.

Reviewer: Depends on how old v0.x versions are.

Author: We don't have a `rego.v0` import. Updated.

#### Pre-requisites

If using v0 bundles, it must be possible to use `--v0-compatible` on the bundle
producers in order for them to work in the v1 consumers.

Similarly, on the consumer side. If `--v0-compatible` cannot be set on the

> consumers, the bundles from v1 producers will not be accepted. v0.x bundle

Reviewer: v1 consumers will accept v1-producer bundles, as these will have the rego-version flag; they won't however accept bundles from v0-producers unless they have `--v0-compatible`.

Author: Updated the text. LMKWYT

- `rego.v0` imports cannot be used; rejected by v0.x bundle producers.

#### Pre-requisites

If using v0 bundles, it must be possible to use `--v0-compatible` on the bundle
producers in order for them to work in the v1 consumers.

Similarly, on the consumer side. If `--v0-compatible` cannot be set on the
consumers, the bundles from v1 producers will not be accepted. v0.x bundle
producers will produce v1.0-incompatible bundles as they will have no Rego
version attribute.

#### Next

Upgrade producers to v1.0 ([Scenario 9](#scenario-9)), completing the upgrade.

### Scenario 9

Once you have all consumers and producers running at v1.0 then you have
completed the upgrade to OPA v1.0. If you are using `--v0-compatible`
functionality, the next task is to upgrade the Rego loaded into OPAs to Rego v1.

Regardless of whether you are now upgrading your Rego, we encourage users to
use `opa check`, `opa check --strict` and to lint their Rego projects if you
have not already done so to identify issues.

## Changes to Rego in OPA v1.0

Once you have upgraded OPA instance to v1.0, or if you are upgrading all at
once, you will need to upgrade your Rego policies to Rego v1. This section

> outlines the changes in Rego v1. See

Reviewer: > See ...

Missing link?

Author: Nah..I think a result of copy-paste. Updated.

### The `future.keywords` imports

The `in`, `every`, `if` and `contains` keywords have been introduced over time,
and in Rego v0 required an opt-in to prevent them from breaking policies that
existed before their introduction. The `future.keywords` imports facilitate this
opt-in mechanism. These keywords help to increase the readability of policies
and provide syntactic sugar for commonly used operations such as iteration,
membership checks, defining multi-value rules, and so on. There is growing
adoption of these keywords and their usage is prevalent in the OPA
documentation, Rego Playground, etc.

> In OPA v1.0 the `in`, `every`, `if` and `contains` keywords are be part of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In OPA v1.0 the `in`, `every`, `if` and `contains` keywords are part of the
```

Author: Done

  to convert the value into a set.

The `contains` keyword is required to disambiguate rules that generate a single
value from rules that generate multiple values. The `if` keyword ensures that
the semantics of rules do not change between v0 and v1 Rego. The table below
illustrates why `if` is required.

| rule              | output in v0             | output in v1.0           |
| ----------------- | ------------------------ | ------------------------ |
| p { true }        | {"p": true}              | compile error            |
| p.a { true }      | {"p": {"a"}}             | compile error            |
| p.a.b { true }    | {"p": {"a": {"b": true}} | compile error            |
| p if { true }     | {"p": true}              | {"p": true}              |
| p.a if { true }   | {"p":{"a": true}}        | {"p":{"a": true}}        |
| p.a.b if { true } | {"p": {"a": {"b": true}} | {"p": {"a": {"b": true}} |
| p contains “a”    | {"p": {"a"}}             | {"p": {"a"}}             |

If the Rego language was changed so that all rules were single-value by default,
unless the `contains` keyword was used to make them multi-value, then the

> outcome of a rule like `p.a { true }` would change between v0 and v1.0

Reviewer: Mixing of version formats.

Author: Updated this to be consistent

| p { true }      | p if { true }              | Single-value rule       |
| p.a             | p contains "a"             | Multi-value insertion   |
| p.a { true }    | p contains "a" if { true } | Multi-value rule        |
| p.a.b           | p.a.b := true              | Single-value assignment |
| p.a.b { true }  | p.a.b if { true }          | Single-value rule       |

Following is an example of how to define a rule that generates a set:

```rego
package play

a contains b if { b := 1 }
```

When the above rule is evaluated the output is (sets are serialized into arrays
in JSON):

```json
{
  "a": [1]
}
```

Following is an example of how to define a rule that generates an object:

```rego
package play

a[b] if { b := 1}
```

When the above rule is evaluated the output is:

```json
{
  "a": {
    "1": true
  }
}
```

The requirement of `if` and `contains` keywords remove the ambiguity
between single-value and multi-value rule declaration. This makes Rego code
easier to author and read; thereby making it simpler for users to author their
policies.

### Prohibit duplicate imports

The Rego compiler supports [strict mode](../policy-language/#strict-mode) which

> enforces additional constraints and safety checks during compilation. One of
> these checks is to prohibit duplicate imports where one import shadows another.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
enforces additional constraints and safety checks during compilation. One of
these checks in OPA v0.x was to prohibit duplicate imports where one import shadows another.
```

Or we could flip it: first describe the check, it's implications, and rationale; and end by saying that this was part of strict-mode in v0.x.

Author: Reworded this section.

OPA v1.0 enforces this check by default.

An import shadowing another is most likely an authoring error and probably
unintentional. OPA checking this by default will help to avoid policy
evaluations resulting in error-prone decisions.

### `input` and `data` keywords are reserved

The Rego compiler supports [strict mode](../policy-language/#strict-mode), which

> enforces additional constraints and safety checks during compilation. One of
> these checks is to ensure that `input` and `data` are reserved keywords and may

Reviewer: ```suggestion
enforces additional constraints and safety checks during compilation. One of
these checks in OPA v0.x was to ensure that `input` and `data` are reserved keywords and may
```

Author: Reworded this section.

not be used as names for rules and variable assignments.

The `input` document holds the user-provided input, while the data pushed into
OPA and rule evaluation results are nested under the `data` document. Hence, if

> a rule or variable shadows `input` or `data` you have the unintended consequence
> of erasing information under these, resulting in incorrect policy decisions. In

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a rule or variable shadows `input` or `data` you have the unintended consequence
of erasing information under these inside the local scope, resulting in incorrect policy decisions. In
```

These documents are immutable, but the old text reads like this is a global mutation.

Author: Updated

functions have been added that provide functionality at least similar to a
deprecated built-in.

### Rego-versioned bundles

A bundle built with OPA `v0.64.0` or later, contain a `rego_version` attribute
in their [manifest](../management-bundles/#bundle-file-format), which the OPA
consuming that bundle will use when processing the contained modules. A bundle's
internal rego-version takes precedence over the presence of the
`--v1-compatible` flag; therefore, prerequisite knowledge about what Rego syntax
any consumed bundle contains is not needed. The `--v1-compatible` flag (and
`--v0-compatible` in v1.0) on the `opa build` command allows the user to control
the `rego-version` of the built bundle.

See [Upgrading to v1.0](./v0-upgrade) for more information on how to use
versioned bundles as part of an upgrade to OPA v1.0.

## Upgrading Rego

Users with v0 Rego projects are encouraged to follow the below process to
upgrade their Rego code to conform to best practices, and to be compatible with
OPA v1.0. These steps are largely based on the process outlined in this
[detailed blog post](https://www.styra.com/blog/renovating-rego/) - please see

> there for more detail, especially if you have a very old Rego codebase which you

Reviewer: > please see there for more detail

A bit arcane wording.

Author: Updated

Also since it's likely there are much more consumers than producers, upgrading producers
first would lead to a smoother upgrade process.

Some users may wish to migrate to OPA v1.0 all at once, with adequate testing and validation
this is possible. Not all steps are necessary for all users so a hybrid approach
is also an option depending on your context.

The rest of this documentation is designed to meet users where they find
themselves and direct them down the smoothest path to upgrade to OPA
v1.0.

## Detailed Producer & Consumer Version Scenarios

Tabulated in this section are the different versions of OPA users might be
working with in different parts of their systems. Select the scenario that best
matches your setup to find the recommended upgrade path.

If you are in doubt, [Scenario 1](#scenario-1) is the most common starting
point and we recommended you start there.

|                           | v0.x Consumer                | Mix Consumer              | v1.0 Consumer                        |
|---------------------------|--------------------------------------|---------------------------|--------------------------------------|

> | v0.x Producer             | [Scenario 1](#scenario-1) (All v0.x) | [Scenario 4](#scenario-4) | [Scenario 7](#scenario-7)            |

Reviewer: Could we make the first column with producers bold, to make it look like a header like the consumer row.

Or is there some way to make the first column also be an actual table header?

Author: Not sure. Maybe @charlieegan3 has an idea on how to do this.
